3.2 retrospective and process updates (#2934)
sourcegraph/sourcegraph: doc/dev/retrospectives/3_2.md

# 3.2 retrospective

"Regardless of what we discover, we understand and truly believe that everyone did the best job they could, given what they knew at the time, their skills and abilities, the resources available, and the situation at hand." --Norm Kerth, Project Retrospectives: A Handbook for Team Review

Review previous retrospective
https://github.com/sourcegraph/sourcegraph/blob/master/doc/dev/retrospectives/3_0.md

## Action items

* Nick make improvements to documented retrospective process
  * Remove survey and directly submit feedback to a Google Doc.
  * Ensure release checklist gives enough time to submit feedback.
  * Remove topic grouping.
  * Add guidance to favor discussing more topics.
  * Be more strict about time limits. Presenter has a visual indicator that everyone can see for remaining time.

* Testing
   * Chris is working to make e2e tests more reliable. The team is thankful for his work enabling e2e tests again.
   * Chris will add docs and do a breakfast and learn based on docs.
   * Issac to determine if Search needs a form of testing that is not satisfied by e2e tests or unit tests.

* User flows

>    * Nick create a document to crowdsource all user flows. Then identify owners.

Reviewer: I will take responsibility for this and come up with a solution that @nicksnyder, @attfarhan, @slimsag, and @beyang approve of (since they were the most vocal ones on this topic).

I would like to have these live in the user-facing documentation (on docs.sourcegraph.com) instead of in a separate document, to follow our [Prefer primary documents](https://docs.sourcegraph.com/dev/documentation#prefer-primary-documents) guideline.

One idea then is to add a Markdown comment like `<!-- user flow owned by @sourcegraph/teamname -->` before any section in the `doc/**/*.md` files that is a user flow. Then we could have a way to easily find all the user flows, and all the user flows for a certain team (or person).

Author: ```suggestion
   * Quinn to figure out how to document user flows and owners of those user flows better.
```

Reviewer 2: My comment was meant to be in this thread:

> I left a small proposal for how I think we could do better here at the end of #2934 (comment)

Reviewer: (Sorry, I still haven't done the thing I said I would do 25 days ago up above. I do still intend to do it.)

   * Stephen update PR template to remind devs to update docs.

* Planning
   * Ryan starts compiling the blog post at the beginning of the release cycle to understand what the problem statements and user stories are.
   * Nick document agency, ownership, expectations of engineering owners
   * Nick create checklist that product delivers to eng. Eng responsibility is to verify all requirements are met.
      * Core requirements for project to be “completed”
      * Wireframes

## Feedback

Testing

* (7) (15 minutes) It feels like we don’t yet have the reliable e2e testing infrastructure that we need. (Loic +1, Tomás +1, Geoffrey +2, Nick +1, Farhan +1, Chris +1)
* (5) It would be helpful to do a lunch and learn (anchored by documentation) about how to write e2e tests / common pitfalls.(ryan +1, Beyang +2, Farhan +1, Francis +1)
* (1) I (Chris) spent half of my iteration on tests+CI and broke a lot of my teammates' builds, but neither e2e tests nor Percy have caught any real bugs yet (Chris +1)
* The 3.1 and 3.2 releases have been smooth. The process is definitely improved, but we have also shipped fewer features. Will releases with more features go as smoothly?

Planning

> * (9) (25 minutes) I continue to think and see examples of where we as a team need to holistically look at our product's end-to-end experience and make sure things work from that perspective. Fixing our individual issues is not enough. (Tomás +1, Stephen+2, Loic +1, Farhan +1, Nick +1, Geoffrey + 1, Ryan +1, Francis +1)

Reviewer: @slimsag I completely agree with the sentiment and need here, I just want to make sure I don't spend time trying to solve the wrong problem (eg: just writing a bunch of narrow user stories, just doing better linking to individual customer reports, just documenting the user workflows better in our docs).

Is this a full accurate phrasing of the problem?

> As a Sourcegraph developer, I need to understand what user workflows are affected by an issue. Without this understanding, it is difficult to devise and implement the right solution that actually solves the user's problem. With this understanding, I can contribute ideas and information that the product team and customer lack, which will lead to a better solution or my having higher confidence in the solution's correctness.
>
> For example, if I am fixing an issue in the validation of external service JSON, I want to know about the user workflows that this would affect:
>
> 1. How site admins add the first external service to get repositories on their instance
> 1. In what cases site admins would need to edit an external service's JSON (i.e., to add a new repository, or to change the `repositoryPathPattern` which currently has a known issue where it will recreate many repositories)
> 1. That only site admins, not end users, would see this page

If what I wrote above doesn't capture 100% what you intend, could you give an example of an individual issue fixed in the last couple months that would have benefitted from more holistic context, and then actually write out the holistic context that would have been helpful?

Reviewer 2: I summarize this as two problems:

1. As a Sourcegraph developer, I can fix a bug that seems to be top priority (like validating external service JSON), but in reality if I went through as a user and tried to add repositories I would encounter a higher priority issue (like https://github.com/sourcegraph/sourcegraph/issues/2514).
    - Observation: Our users run into issues before we do, because our users are testing the on-boarding flow end-to-end very often, but we rarely do.
    - Guess: We work and prioritize the set of issues that we have observed, not the total set of issues that exist (i.e. significant onboarding issues we haven't encountered or had reported yet).
2. As a Sourcegraph developer, I can work on a bug or feature and unbeknownst to me regress on core user flows that I haven't thought of or didn't feel I was responsible for.
    - This is mostly a product responsibility issue.
    - An example of this happening is https://github.com/sourcegraph/sourcegraph/issues/2770 -- at some point we changed the behavior to be this way, but nobody clearly owned ensuring that setting up the browser extension on private code hosts worked well and because of this a customer ran into it before we did (at which point we added docs / improved the UX to mention it).

I could probably provide more concrete examples of the above two points if I went back and took a detailed look at user-reported issues, but the general _feeling_ I have is that we would benefit A LOT from having more ownership around user flows.  This is why I proposed https://github.com/sourcegraph/sourcegraph/pull/2934#discussion_r268387716

What I would like to see is something like:

> $SOURCEGRAPH_DEV: you are responsible for ensuring that $USER_FLOW works and works well. This means:
>
> - Keeping us aware of what the issues are, by ensuring that you personally regularly run through and test the user flows.
> - Keeping us honest by reverting changes if they caused a substantial regression on the user flow.
> - Ensuring we prioritize the right issues around that user flow by flagging important ones (i.e. for Quinn/Nick to review).

Reviewer 2: Also, to be completely clear, your quote (while a good thing to solve) does not accurately describe the problem in my mind. Yours sits more on the edge of "how do we make developers more aware of what the user flows are", which is a good thing to focus on separately, but my point here is more on the edge of "how do we make developers ask 'what are the core user flows I should care about?' in the first place"

Reviewer: @beyang is taking ownership of this over from me (I had not done it yet)

* Getting better at getting the necessary input from design and code reviewers to ship the main features.
* Didn’t finish any of the auth-related issues, need to do better about triaging those properly.
* I liked that I was able to work on tech debt, refactoring, and testing. I fixed a bunch of long-standing bugs, and it felt great to get them out of the way without feeling like I was working on the "wrong" thing.
* I wish I had planned my refactoring and testing work better. I didn't set solid targets for things to accomplish, so I didn't hold myself accountable for shipping the refactors and tests.
* I want to get better at sharing progress, not waiting until I think it’s perfect.

Release process

* (6) I think we need to be more mindful of our users when considering merging a change. If a change is agreed to already be a good improvement over the status quo and solves issues that users are facing, we should be certain that change lands in the next release and follow up on any further suggestions in subsequent PRs and releases." (Nick +1, Loic +1, Chris +1, Stephen +2, Tomás +1)

> * (3) We should have a deadline for opening up PRs that will make it into the release branch(Francis +1, Loic +1, Ryan +1)

Reviewer: @francisschmaltz @lguychard @ryan-blunden What problem is this intending to solve? Is it (1) to safeguard against hacking things in at the last minute? Or (2) to encourage people to open up PRs earlier in general? Or something else? Also, is there a specific instance that would have been improved by this rule?

Reviewer 3: This addresses my concern of not merging PRs that do not go through design review.

Author: Creating a deadline for opening PRs feels like an indirect solution to other problems. I can imagine small PRs that are high value, low risk, and don't require a lot of review (code, product, design, or otherwise) that would be silly to block on such a rule.

Instead, let's focus on clearly defining what is required to merge and not let anything get merged that shouldn't be. If something gets merged before the release branch is created, then it is in the release.

Reviewer 2: I left a small proposal for how I think we could do better here at the end of https://github.com/sourcegraph/sourcegraph/pull/2934#discussion_r269327725

Author: @slimsag can you clarify how that comment you linked to relates to this discussion thread about a deadline for opening PRs?

Reviewer 2: https://github.com/sourcegraph/sourcegraph/pull/2934#discussion_r276097800

* (1) Any dev rel activity, e.g. docs issues tied to a release *must* also adhere to being code complete by the 15th and only vital commits cherry picked (this should be the rare exception) (Nick +1)
* (1) The hardest part about being release captain is advising devs that their feature is not going to ship because it isn’t ready.(Francis +1)
* It was calm for me. No last minute fires to put off. I'm happy. I learned that we're serious about stability and sustainability.
* I need to prepare earlier for dev rel tasks and create a dev rel specific release checklist

Customer request prioritization

> * (4) There was a customer request that came in towards the end of the release cycle. It was important / high-impact enough that it preempted my other tasks,  but I didn't clarify how "complete" the solution needed to be. As a result, I spend 3x more time that I needed to. If I had clarified the scope earlier, I could have avoided doing that extra research until we had more signal that we should continue working on this. (Tomás +1, Geoffrey +1, Francis +1, Beyang +1)

Reviewer: @ggilmore 	Do you feel that we are doing better on the most recent instance of this (the customer who needs a managed instance)? Specifically how you just need to do the managed instance for this 1 customer (the n=1 case), not to build a general solution for offering managed instances?
